So, the last chapter is
push notifications, okay?
So, web push notifications or
push notifications or
Web Push notifications apart it
depends on the case it's just
the same an umbrella of API's and
abilities that we have today,
to notify the user from the server
asking first permission.
Okay, we will see this in a minute.
So, we need to ask the user permission
if granted, now the service worker
can create notification from
the background, and that's not push yet.
It's just notification.
But also,
the PWA can subscribe the user to push.
I will show you a diagram in a second.
About how this works.
And then a push event will be fired in
the service worker, to handle the push.
So, in this case the server can
send the message to that user and
then on that user's device
the browser will wake up
the service worker and
it will fire the push event handler.
Today is working on Firefox, Chrome, Edge,
Samsung Internet, and
Safari from macOS 13, macOS Ventura.
Even if you have the latest
Safari on previous versions of
macOS is not going to work.
The reason is that macOS
Ventura has a new demon.
At the OS level for web push, okay?
And iOS and iPadOS was promised for
2023 at some point,
not sure if it's going to be for iOS 17.
Or who knows?
So today it appears as an experiment,
but it's not working yet.
So even if you enable the experiment
in safari settings on IOS,
the code doesn't work.
So the first step is a step that
we have already seen before,
because it's the same step that we see for
the old classic desktop notification
API is to ask for permission.
It's exactly the same code, okay?
So, the first step is to request
permission for notification.
This is a, I think, the most challenging
part of this API from
a new UX perspective.
So, we are not covering that
the user experience part today
we're more on the technical side, but
there are a lot of articles and
books on the topic on when to ask for
notification permission to
increase the opportunity.
For a yes from the user, okay?
So that's the challenging part.
>> Is there when you ask the user for
permission, part of the UX best practices
is to explain yourself and
why the permission is necessary.
Is that built into the Request API
>> Must you do that?
No, that's a very good question.
Unfortunately, the permission API and
this permission API in
particular don't have a way to express,
why are you requesting this?
So the answer has to do
with your user interface.
So before By asking the API permission,
you should present a window or
something explaining the user
the advantages of saying yes.
And then typically what you see
is an escape for now, or a yes.
And the yes will trigger the real dialog.
If the user already say yes.
It's there is a good chance that it will
say yes to the real dialog after that so
something like that but
unfortunately the API does not
include that as the native API's.
So native Android and iOS API's,
they include in a string description for
the permission that you see.
I mean,
what the geo location permission appears.
It explains why it needs that,
but not on the web.
So, we're going to go this in a minute,
but let's go over the steps first.
So far, we have permission for
sending notifications.
Okay, but this is not push yet.
For push, we are going to see
the push subscription architecture.
So, we have a web server that's
our back end our web server and
there is a push server the push
server is owned by the browser so
it's not on our side okay, and
then we have client by inside
the service worker and the runtime,
also known as the browser, but
it can be also a PWA standalone window, so
the runtime that is rendering our website.
Okay, so the runtime request
push to the push server,
so actually request to the browser and
the browser.
Ask the push server, the push server
this is after we have permission.
Okay, so
after the user has granted permission,
the push server will give
us subscription details.
And we have to send those details.
Joe, we're back in.
Okay.
So that's the flow.
You will understand this at the end.
Believe me, trust me.
So, again, we ask Safari or Chrome or
Firefox for subscription details and
they will give us an object and we need
to save that object in our web service,
and you will understand why in a minute.
So, to actually request this,
we also need to get the service
worker registration object,
and over that we talk to the push manager,
and we register a push.
The push, we subscribe a push,
needs two mandatory properties.
A user visible only,
that the only acceptable value is true.
This is something that we
discussed before today.
So, on native applications,
you can send silent notification.
A silent notification
will wake up the app.
The data that we're sending
is received by the app but
the app doesn't need to notify the user.
On the web, this is forbidden.
We can only subscribe to
user visible notification.
So, that means every message
that the server is sending will
notify something to the user.
So, if we are abusing this, the user
will notice that it will be annoying,
and he will remove the permission
it will revoke the permission
from the notification itself.
Even Chrome right now in case
of Chrome When there is,
there are many notifications from the same
origin is giving you a man another
notification says, hey, you're receiving
too many notifications from this origin Do
you want to revoke permission?
Okay, and then we need to send
an application server key.
So, today at least the Web Push
system is working on top of
something known as BAP ID.
It doesn't matter how to do with
security but a few years ago
initially we didn't have that, but
now we have that on every browser.
That's actually a pair of public and
private keys.
Okay, so for our server,
we need to create those keys, and
I will show you how to do
that in a couple of minutes.
And we need to put our public key
there in the application server key.
The key is a string, so
we put the string there.
We copy and paste to the public key, okay?
So, that key will actually
travel to the push server.
Okay and the server so Safari or
Chrome will actually store our
public key with our origin.
So, you will start understanding
why this is needed, okay?
This is for security.
So, no one can actually impersonate us,
and sending push messages with our name.
So, that's why we also have a private
key That we need to store safely,
and no one needs to know
about our private key, okay?
Make sense?
And so, this is a promise,
so we wait for it.
And when we have the data,
we need to save the data in our server.
That's the idea.
So, we do a fetch to our server,
and we send the data, and
the server needs to store that somewhere
in a database, okay, wherever you want.
You will need that data
to send messages to
that user in the future, okay?
Makes sense?
The data looks like this.
Because I think you were
thinking about this.
So, what's the data,
what subscription details.
You receive an endpoint.
The endpoint is actually a URL
that typically has a unique ID for
that user on that device You won't
get the username, the user email,
nothing that will actually
point to the real user.
It's a unique ID that represents
that user in that device.
So, if the user is on an iPhone,
and it's on Safari on the Mac,
let's say that iPhone supports the API.
You will get, if the user is subscribing
and on the same website to push,
you will get two different unique ideas.
And you'll know if it's the same user or
not,
even if it's the same iCloud account,
okay?
And also, you receive keys.
And those keys, are actually
public keys from the push server.
Okay, and we just say this,
all that data in our server.
Yes.
>> When you say that the push
server is owned by the browser,
do you mean that it's owned and
operated by the browser vendor?
Yeah.
>> So like.
>> Apple multilane Google, yes.
>> Like have to operate push
servers to provide this as
an intermediary essentially.
>> That's correct, yeah
>> Okay, they have their own cloud, and
they have their services there and
we are going to talk to those servers
in the future to send messages to.
Okay, make sense, so this is the data
that we will get from every user,
and we need to send that data.
To our server.
In fact, before coding this,
let me run this on any website,
because we can actually
see this on every website.
For example, I can, let's go and
request permission for
notification on any website,
which website do you want?
Good.
How can we do that?
Yes, so can I request notification?
There you have it.
GitHub wants to notify me just
because I pasted deadline, okay.
I say okay, yeah, granted.
So now I have notifications
on this origin on this.
In this origin, in this browser.
This is per browser, per origin, okay?
So, it's granted.
So, that means that now
I can request a push.
So, without all the data here,
I need this code.
The problem that I have despite that
character although I don't know what
that is, is that I need the key.
Also I need service worker registration.
I don't if it has service worker actually.
lets see application, no it doesn't.
So without service worker.
No push but
I don't have permission because you can
still create local notifications.
Remember it's the same permission.
Okay, so let's go to skoosh.
They do have a service
worker because it's a PWA.
So requesting permission,
granted permission.
Now I need to, Say that
registration is await navigator.
Service worker ready and
over data registration
I'm going to talk to the push manager but
hey my key is not valid
because I need the public key.
So, how can you create keys?
The simplest way,
we will do that with our code in a minute.
But I want to show you first that I can
run this over any website, actually,
even if I don't know the website.
It's weird.
So, I open a terminal.
And I will run a magic code, not really
a magic code, but it's something on NPM.
I'm going to execute over a Web Push
library it generates VAP ID keys.
I have a pair of keys, the public key and
the private key, every time you run
this you get another pair When you pick
one, you need to safely store that, okay?
So, now I can take that public key,
for example, and
try to use that one as the key here.
Let's see, I still think it's fine.
I didn't get any response yet, so
it's still waiting for some reason.
I'm here, counsel.
It's working.
>> Could just be returning nothing.
>> No, there we are.
It just took a lot of time.
I'm not sure why.
Yeah, not normal.
Anyway, this is the object
that I have in return.
I have an endpoint and
look at the endpoint fcm.
That's five Cloud messaging.
Google apis.com, blah,
blah, blah, blah, blah.
And this is the my id.
And then, options with another
key that's an array buffer so
now with that information I can send
a message to myself as skoosh .app,
Okay?
At at least it will work.
So now we will do that
process with our app, okay?
But at first I wanna show you that you
can actually get that information pretty
quickly, okay,
on any website if it has a service worker.
Because without service
worker we don't have the API.